A General Evaluation on Drug Distribution and Automation Systems in Pharmacy
B.Kıran1 N.Şencan2
1Ege Üniversitesi, İzmir,Turkey, kiran.bulent@gmail.com
2Acıbadem Ünivesitesi, İstanbul,Turkey, nazlisencan@gmail.com
Abstract
In this study, the advantages and disadvantages of main automation systems have been examined,
which have a tendency to become widespread in drug distribution in hospitals around the world. It was
determined that the costs of automation systems are high; on the other hand, these are effective in reducing the
workload of pharmacists and hospital accreditations, and also in preventing drug waste. It was also determined
that the automation systems enable pharmacists to make drug counseling more effective by saving time for
drug distribution, and increase patient safety by reducing the risks associated with medication errors [1]. It was
evaluated that determining the size of pharmaceutical automation systems according to the number of beds in
hospitals will be more affordable in terms of cost efficiency. In pharmaceutical services where technology
usage is increasing, it is considered to be beneficial to include pharmaceutical automation systems in
undergraduate, graduate and on the continuing education programs.
Introduction
The use of technology in pharmaceuticals and pharmacy services is becoming increasingly
common around the world. The aim of the study is to evaluate drug automation systems used in
hospital pharmacies in the world, their advantages and disadvantages and the relevant literature, and
to draw attention to the importance of the subject. Problems arising from drug management processes,
including many procedures such as purchase, storage, distribution of the drugs, and also the
administration of the drugs safely to patients in clinics lead to frequently encountered medical
malpractices in hospitals [1].
On the other hand, hospitals should be accredited in order to engage international health
tourism. In addition, canceling out the medical malpractices for drug distribution and administration
is one of the most important criteria for accreditation requested by the International Accreditation
Institution- JCI (Joint Commission International) [1]. In this context, drug automation systems are
today becoming increasingly common in internationally accredited hospitals [1-3].Automation
systems reduce the workload of pharmacists, increase the patient safety and allow for more effective
counseling for patients and health care professionals on their rational drug use [1-5].On the other
hand, it is reported that the use of drug automation systems is positively affected the quality of service
in community pharmacies and that this technology-based system of the future will become common
in both community and hospital pharmacies [4-5].
Systems Used for Automated Drug Distribution and Unit Dose Drug Management in the World
Although the systems that deliver unit dose drugs are designed differently according to various brand
characteristics, they basically work on almost the same principle. Briefly; it is an automatic cabinet including
touch screen, monitor, keyboard and safe storage spaces. A user ID and password are required to access this
storage. First, the user selects a patient profile from the list and the medical treatment that should be applied
to that patient after entering its user ID and password. Then the distribution cabin locks the drawer containing
the drug, and when it is time for the drug administration it allows the user to access the drawer. If the drawer
does not close properly and in case of undesired situations, the system warns by signaling.
As a result, drugs prepared according to the treatment plan directives prescribed by the doctor become
available for the administration of nurse or relevant health care personnel. Automatic drug distribution cabinets
are generally found in nursing stations, emergency services and surgery rooms [1].
The most widely known unit dose drug automation systems in the world are Pyxis, Swisslog and Rowa
Speedcase automation systems. Their advantages and disadvantages can be summarized as follows [6-8] ;

Advantages and Disadvantages of Pharmaceutical Automation Systems:
Advantages of Pyxis Automation System [6].
1. Fast access to first dose of the drug
2. Shifting the workload in the pharmacy to the floors of the clinics
3. Only authorized persons can access the drug by fingerprint verification
4. Able to make stock tracking
5. Able to receive all reports about the drug
6. Ensuring access to the right drug at the right time
Disadvantages of Pyxis Automation System [6].
1. Obligation to perform deblister
2. Drug wastes during deblister
3. The drug expires within 2-3 weeks due to deblister,
4. Medication errors as there is more than one drug in each drawer during drug intake
5. Bringing extra workload to nurses
6. Storage of parenteral forms, without barcodes, such as ampules, vials, syringes
7. Failure to make lot tracking as unit dose
8. Errors that may result from restoring the returned drug
9. Failure to check the expiry date of the same medicines in the drawer
10. Data transfer problems
11. Barcode verification of tablet drugs only at the bedside
12. Failure to completely prevent medication errors
13. Unable to save labor in the pharmacy or on the floors (on the contrary, extra labor is required)
Advantages of Swisslog system [7].
1.Ability to barcode each type of drug as unit dose
2.Able to write patient and drug information on the bags delivered by the device
3.Unit dose stock tracking of all kinds of drugs
4.Able to receive all reports about the drug
5.Ensuring access to the right drug for the right patient
6.Drug preparation process is automated
7.The expiry date of the drugs as unit dose can be checked
8.Ensures savings by having to return unused drugs to the pharmacy
9.Prevents unnecessary stock on the floors because unit dose drug is prepared for the patient
10.Significantly reduces the labor requirement (60%)
11.Minimizing the waste of time by reducing the workload in pharmacies and nurses
12.No need for deblistering the drug
13.Due to the fact that there is no need to deblister, the drug expiry date remains the same as the expiry
date during production
14.No loss of data transfer due to its central structure

Disadvantages of the Swisslog system: Large volume drugs such as serum and formula cannot be
prepared as unit dose for the patient. [7].
Advantages of Rowa Speedcase System [8].
1- Reduction in department expenses
2- Reduction in medication errors
3- Reducing drug distribution times to patients
4- Ensures time to staff for direct patient care
5- Increased service reliability
6- Easier stock control
Disadvantages of Rowa Speedcase System [8].
Rowa Vmax system cannot make unit dose packaging and send drugs to the clinic.
Today the most important medical malpractice and economic losses in hospitals are drug-induced errors.
As well as the advantages of the proposed drug automation systems instead of the classic drug delivery
systems, due to their contribution to accreditation processes that facilitate international patient admission of
hospitals, there are also major disadvantages according to their brand and model. In addition, while the need
for qualified personnel to use these systems is increasing, it is suggested that it will increase unemployment
problem due to drastically reduce the need for existing labor force.
In addition, it is thought that training of pharmacists on drug automation systems, working in
hospitals affiliated to the Ministry of Health with the largest drug consumption in the public sector
and the establishment of these systems in city hospitals with large number of patient beds are
important issues in terms of both preventing economic losses and reducing medical malpractices.
Conclusion and Recommendations
Although automated systems for unit dose drug and medical equipment distribution are costly, there are
increasing claims that these systems are highly increased the patient safety and ensured savings with very good
planning and dedicated solutions to the needs of each hospital. As hospitals may prefer a fully automated pyxis
or swisslog system, which includes the high-cost complete automation, it is also possible for them to move
into this system step by step according to the hospital characteristics and budget facilities These steps can be
performed step by step with storage systems, and automation systems for unit tablet dosage only and so on [1-
11]. The usage in private hospitals targeting to receive accreditation in the future as well as large-scale
university and public hospitals can be expected to become widespread. Therefore, it is considered to be
beneficial to include pharmaceutical automation systems in undergraduate, graduate and on the continuing
education programs.
References
[1] Kıran, B. (2014). Evaluation of Pharmaceutical Automation Systems, KİTDER. Journal
Yuklenim, 10(14), 11-6.
[2] Black, A. Brice, S. Hardy, L. Longshaw, R.(2006). Validation of cold storage shelves in an
automated dispensing system. Hospital Pharmacist, (13), 372.
[3] Brice, S. , Hardy, L. , Longshaw, R.(2006). Evaluation of automatic loading devices with a
ROWA speedcase system. Hospital Pharmacist, (13), 375-378.
[4] Lauren B. A., Dale B.C., Stefanie P. F (2005). Impact of Community Pharmacy Automation
on Workflow, Workload, and Patient Interaction. JAPhA, 45(2), 138–144.
[5] James O. B.(2010).Analysis of the Medication Management System in Seven Hospitals;
medBPM Whitepaper, CareFusion research.
[6] The Unit Dose System, “PYXİS”; (Access:12.05.2019).
http://www.simeks.com.tr/haberler/birim-doz-ilac-uygulayan-sistem-pyxis.htm
[7] Pharmacy Automation System Swisslog, (Access:1205.2019),
http://www.swisslog.com/hcs-pharmacyautomation.pdf
[8] Goundrey-Smith S. (2008). Pharmacy robots in UK hospitals: the benefits and implementation
issues. Pharm J; 280, 599-602.
[9] Analysis of the Medication Management System in Seven Hospitals (2008). medBPM
Whitepaper, CareFusion research,
[10] Chan E.,A.Ramudhin (2007).An Evaluation of Various Business Process Modeling
Techniques Applied to Healthcare.ISEM 07,Beijing.
[11] Şardan, Y.Ç. (2008). Pharmaceuticals and Materials Management Roadmap. Journal of
Medical Sağlık Ve Tıp Tekn. (77), 1-4.
